Good. Liam,
we're in your hands. So if you want to give us a bit of an opening statement or a
few comments.
Yes. Well,
look, first of all, thank you very much to the committee for this opportunity.
We've got a lot of wonderful news to share about how the Ministry for
Regulation has been unlocking New Zealanders'
potential by removing red tape,
getting rid of stupid rules that have been holding us back from achieving the
things we'd like to achieve for ourselves and our families.
I'm joined by two colleagues to assist with any
questions that you may have.
But overall, I think we can point to a great story of success
because for a long time, New Zealanders have faced the regulatory
impulse, and that is that whenever there's a problem, rules are put in
place, and those rules tend to lead to an enormous
amount of frustration and restriction on what people are able to
achieve. To give some examples, the hemp industry
was regulated in a way that assumes that people were
growing cannabis with THC. That is clearly not true,
and there's some good reasons why you would not grow hemp or
near THC to do with cross-fertilization.
Having realized that reality, those rules have been
removed. And I've heard one report from within the hemp
industry that David Seymour has gone almost overnight from being a dark
overlord to a kind of folk hero within the industry.
Millions of dollars of revenue have been
unlocked and unleashed in that industry because they no longer have a
silly regulatory system. Mayors up and down the country
have been very happy that they no longer have to carry out futile
inspections of hairdressers, as is the hairdressing industry.
Again, millions of dollars worth of saving.
The early childhood education sector, thanks to its sector review,
has had its rules completely replaced,
its regulatory system completely overhauled,
and looks forwards again to tens of millions of dollars of savings
from reduced compliance time so that people can return to doing the
things that they would most like to do, which
is being able to help young New Zealanders reach their potential.
And then you get to an area like medical
conferences. For a long time, New Zealand health professionals would go to
places like Fiji and Noosa to learn about the latest
in medical technology because it was illegal to advertise them here.
We've removed those restrictions and already seen medical conferences
occurring in New Zealand. Again,
an estimated $6 to $30 million-
Sorry
... in additional economic benefit over the next ten years
from those conferences happening here rather than over there.
Although I have heard some complaints from doctors who liked going to Fiji and
Noosa that their medical conferences are now more likely to be in places
like Auckland and Tauranga and Queenstown.
Very good for the New Zealand economy, less so for people's air
miles and for some of those other destinations.
The Ministry for Regulation has also shepherded through the
Regulatory Standards Act. It comes into effect at the beginning
of next month, and for the first time, we will have property
rights in law. We'll also have declarations or
transparency around the impacts of law on people's property
rights that is refereed by a neutral and expert group
in the form of the Regulatory Standards Board.
For democracy, this is an enormous step forward because New
Zealanders' vision or visibility and transparency of the effects
of rules being made, the costs and benefits of those rules, the impairments of
their property and their liberties will be laid bare in a way that they never have
been before. This again, I've talked about the
restrictions on lawmaking that have been put in place so far.
We're now extending those into the future.
I'll wrap up and allow for questions.
But in summary, this small but mighty ministry,
I believe the third smallest in the public service,
is unlocking potential and economic benefit
at roughly ten times what it costs.
And the only thing that we need of that is a lot more.
Thank you, Minister. We're going to start with Georgie Dansey.
Great. Thanks, Minister.
Wanted to ask questions around the 2% savings in
Budget '26.
So I understand that the Ministry of Regulation has to make
$600,000 of savings per annum. And so my first
question, and I'll have subs, was just around
where that saving is going to come from in the first year.
So the ministry has reassured me that they will make the savings.
I don't get involved in their day-to-day operations, but I'm quite happy to
turn you over to Andrew Royall, who's the acting chief executive,
and I'm sure he can address that in more detail than I can.
Thanks.
So yes, we have had a look at that in terms of next year budget,
'27, '28, and we are confident that we'll make it
through a combination of operating savings, essentially
through some of our contracted budget and probably
looking to
where we might have some attrition in relation to positions.
But at this point, we're not looking at anything more significant than that.
Thank you.
So just thinking just on with that and making it up through
attrition, what impact are these cuts going to
have on the effective delivery within the ministry?
I could continue on that, Minister.
I think you're very well-placed to comment on that.
So, I suspect like most departments, we're looking first for
efficiencies. So one of the things we've been looking at is our
systems,
use of AI in particular, use of tech
And where we can find efficiency there.
And then beyond that, if necessary, there are some parts
of the operation that are scalable.
So for example,
various parts of our business involve regulatory reviews or responding to
queries and things that come in through the red tape tip line.
So we may be able to scale some of those things if necessary.
At this stage, we're not
really expecting that we'll need to scale back.
We do anticipate being able to find those through savings.
Okay, thank you. And so you're not anticipating any specific work
streams to be closed?
Thanks.
Sup on that around contractors and consultants for the
minister.
Reviewing the performance of the ministry so
far, there's been a significant number of consultants and
contractors used as opposed to permanent staff.
Do you anticipate reducing that number in order to make
savings, or what does that look like?
Well, I think what's important is that it's a very small ministry that does quite
diverse work. So one day you can have
100,000 select committee submissions to
analyze, and people who submit to our parliament deserve to have their
submissions analyzed. So the ministry used an external
contractor who was able to do that better, faster and cheaper
than existing ministry staff who don't specialize in doing that.
Similarly, where we have sought to validate the
economic benefits that are being delivered by the Ministry for Regulation.
Again, if we were to do it with our own very good in-house economist, people might
question the veracity of that. So we've sought to have people
outside the Ministry for Regulation peer review the
economic analysis that I've been sharing with you, because we think that's
important so that taxpayers can know that the value that they're getting is
real, and it's not just us saying it.
So there'll always be good reasons for a very small ministry doing a range of
specialized tasks and yet diving into specialized
industries to get help rather than just hire more people.
And I think that can be a prudent thing to do.
So the short answer is no, I don't intend to micromanage
whether these guys do stuff in-house or out-house.
I think it's better as a minister to allow them to make those calls.
Yeah, I guess,
I'm just thinking around the additional costs that those
contractors and consultants
were compared to employing staff, and I take the
point that you've made.
But thinking about the government's overall goal to reduce the
size of the public service,
but then increasing costs within the Ministry of Regulation.
What value is being added there-
Well-
... and what cost benefit are we receiving from that?
Well, they haven't made additional cost, they haven't borne additional
costs. They've managed their costs within their budget, and in fact,
they've participated in savings exercises where they've actually reduced their
budget, and given back
money that they could have otherwise spent within their budget.
So if anything, the Ministry for Regulation is saving money, perhaps because
they're committed to getting rid of stupid rules, cutting red tape,
unlocking New Zealand's potential while being as efficient as
possible.
Yeah. Thanks. And so what does that look like
regarding comparison to the Productivity Commission and the fact that the
Ministry of Regulation is four times the size of the
entity that it replaced?
Well, if you look at what it's produced, it has produced value
for New Zealanders around 10 times, at the upper estimate,
16 times the cost of the Ministry for Regulation.
I don't believe that
any other organization can point to that.
Certainly, the Productivity Commission couldn't.
I also say that you may have been caught in some
misinformation, that somehow that comparison is
relevant. It is true that the Productivity Commission was
disestablished in part to fund
the Ministry for Regulation because we wanted to ensure that we're
getting value for money in everything we do.
It's also true that some people from the Treasury who previously
worked on regulatory initiatives,
their funding was transferred to the Ministry for Regulation.
And it's also true that because the government is so committed to cutting red
tape, that we have put additional money into it.
But the idea that there has to be some sort of comparison
between one organization that has ceased and a new one that is
unlocking value for New Zealanders at a large multiple of its cost,
that's not a valid comparison.
Thanks. That's all.
We're going to go to Lawrence Yuen now.
Okay.
Thank you. Just following on the line of questioning around the ministry
and just noting to the Chair that we also have questions around the Regulatory
Standards Board. Just following on from what the minister said, sound bites aside,
what funding is there to actually genuinely looking at evaluation
of the sector review and showing that the cost
savings that the minister has said has actually been delivered?
Because even if I look at the pre-hearing questions, there's really no
indicators.
The numbers that the minister have mentioned,
have they materialized?
Yeah. Absolutely.
What evidence is there to suggest that?
Well, people no longer have to, for example, have a
futile inspection by a council in order to operate
a hairdresser. So that cost is no longer a fee for the hairdresser.
It's no longer a cost for the council to employ the people.
If you are in the hemp industry, you no longer have to go through the
licensing process that you previously did, so you no
longer face those costs. As the new licensing
criteria and the new regulator are bedded in for early
childhood education, there'll be many compliance activities that you
no longer have to carry out. If you look at medical conferences,
they are happening, whereas we know that they weren't previously viable.
So the evidence is all around us in the real world.
But those are business costs
The point that's been made is that there is supposed to be
a net public benefit cost. Have that cost
that the minister have mentioned transitioned into something that has
benefited the public overall?
Well, the people that we're talking about are members of the public.
The medical profession are members of the public.
People who work growing hemp products and buying hemp products,
they are members of the public. People who send their children
to daycare, they are members of the public.
People who get their hair cut and operate hairdressers, they are members of the
public. I mean-
Has that led to a reduction in the cost for members of
public as a result of these savings from
cuts, from some of the savings from regulatory removal?
Well, inevitably, if you reduce the costs on a sector,
then there is a dividend, and that dividend is going to be shared partly by the
people who work in the sector, partly by the people who have invested
in the sector, and partly by those who are customers.
The exact breakdown of those benefits, well, you could
argue till the cows come home exactly what the prices might have been
were the cost not reduced. But I think it's reasonable to say that if
you reduce a pointless rule and you reduce a cost
that wasn't giving any benefit, then New Zealanders are going to be better off.
But an assumption is not the same thing as factual.
Is that something that the
Ministry for Regulations will at least have some understanding of in terms
of some of the cuts I see not from the chief executive?
Well, he can add anything. He may have something to add, but,
I would've thought that most people
can follow along that if you previously as a hairdresser had to
pay $400 for an inspection that did nothing, and if you as a
council previously had to employ somebody and now you don't have
to, or they can do something else that's valuable to people that live under
that council's jurisdiction, then that is a benefit.
I think you are seeking
a level of certainty that actually has already been
given to you. It's in plain sight.
I'm seeking a level of genuine public benefit, but I will move on to my
next supplementary question, which is around
the red tape tip line, sort of what evaluation has been done to
ensure that it's continued to be funded in future budget?
Well, the fact that it's had enormous engagement from New Zealanders,
it's had over 1,600 people get in touch,
and in many cases, their problems have been solved as a result
of that.
So how then does the Ministry justify making
or investigating in non-issues that have no relevance to
regulations? For example, in the investigation launched last year
regarding the Ray-Ban Meta smart glasses,
spending, wasting taxpayer dollars to realize there's no
regulatory barrier. In fact, the glasses haven't even been launched in New Zealand.
Well, it's very simple. We are responding to members of the public.
If you would like to criticize the members of the public who
submit and say that they should not be able to submit unless
their submissions meet the standards of Lawrence Yuen and the Green
Party, well, that's a very interesting position for you to take, and I would
encourage you
to share that attitude with more members of the public in the run-up to November
7th.
No, I'm actually simply asking a question on whether the Ministry is performing its
function, which is the role of an MP during scrutiny week.
But I want to check with the minister finally, my final question is, minister,
what's the difference between guidance and regulations?
I beg your pardon?
What's the difference between guidance and regulations?
I'm not aware that there's a formal definition of those, but generally
speaking, a regulation is something that you're compelled to follow on pain
of some sort of sanction,
whereas guidance is something that is optional but advised.
Does the minister think that the guidance that the Ministry of Regulations released
regarding the use of AI is sufficient to regulate the use
of AI, particularly when it comes to some of the changes we're seeing-
Well-
... of the use of AI in public service?
Let me help you. Your first question was,
what's the difference between guidance and regulation, which implies
that you know there's a difference.
And your second question is, is guidance the same as regulation?
But if you think about it, your first question contained the answer to your second
question.
No, my second question is-
Okay
... does the minister think that the guidance that has been provided by his
ministry is sufficient to address the regulatory gap in AI?
Well, no, because guidance is different from regulation, which you know.
Is there any move on introducing regulations
on the use of AI, particularly in public services?
Well, that may well happen, but it's a question that you'd be better to direct
to the Public Service Commission.
I've got one sub from Claudia Dent.
Thanks. Just on the line of questioning around AI, can you talk
about how much the Ministry invests in AI per annum?
Again, as far as the operations within the Ministry, I'll defer to the acting
chief executive.
Then I'll defer to Paula, who is-
There you go.
That's easily me.
I probably couldn't tell you really the amount that we're investing in AI, but
I can certainly provide you the figures that we are investing for particular
projects. I don't have those with me today.
Of course, we have one appropriation, and we do break that down in terms of
our different projects, but it's not specifically broken down into the amount that
we invest into AI.
You got a supplementary?
You go. Maybe not. Oh, I was just going to ask because we know that you used AI
to analyze the submissions to the Regulatory Principles
Bill. How much did that cost?
Are you asking about the contracts or-
You used AI to--
The Ministry used AI to analyze the submissions on the regulatory
Principles
Standards
Standards. Sorry, the standards.
But-
We did for the first round, so the-
Yeah. So the question is just how much did it cost?
This, so I actually don't know off the top of my head.
Again, we can provide those figures-
I think that the answer, we're happy to provide the figure,
in written questions. But I think-
I don't think we need...
I think-
The answer we've, I mean, given is no, they don't know.
I-
So we'll get a response there
... but I think an intuitive answer-
We don't-
... would be far less than had it been done manually, and adopting technology
to raise productivity-
No, I'm just ask- I'm asking for the number, not the intuitions
... and get things done faster, is actually exactly the sort of thing we stand for
Right. This is taking time on this. We've actually got the answer.
With respect. Hang on. With respect, you asked a question, we're not
supposed to be asking questions going forward. You asked a reflective question.
He's providing an answer.
No, I didn't. I asked how much did the-
Again, it's a reflective question
... AI analysis of the regulatory process cost?
And it's a budget question.
He's prepared to provide it in written question.
Okay, we're going to go to the-
And he said he could provide the answer.
I've just got a wee one.
Quick start from Megan.
Thank you. You talked about increasing the use of AI.
Mm.
Can you give the committee some areas where you're looking, other areas where
you're looking to use AI to, for your cost savings?
Yeah, absolutely. You may have seen recently our regulatory mapping
exercise-
Yeah
... where we have for the first time identified the
number of regulators, the parties that they regulate,
and the legal instruments that they enforce.
Constructing that map, I think is an enormously valuable thing
because it helps us ask questions about, well, do we need all these
regulators? Are there better ways to solve people's problems?
And in the background of that is quite a sophisticated tool that's
done the mapping.
Right.
And I can see in- increasing possibilities, for the use of AI,
for example, let's give you one. I was recently speaking
to somebody about what the government of Thailand, of all
places, have done. They've made extensive use of
AI to map the regulations they have
against OECD best practice. So when we have produced
such a vast amount of paperwork as governments and parliaments
over the last few decades, the potential to really drill into that, find the
patterns, analyze and work out what we don't need to free up people's time,
I think is enormous.
Thank you.
Going to the primary from Dr. David Wilson.
I'm fa- a little bit fascinated by the net public benefit.
It says in other areas that, in terms of looking forward for your
performance analysis, you're looking at out- outcomes and impact.
I think it's a nice way of looking at considering what we've been through in public
service performance. So my question really is:
how do you calculate net public benefit?
Oh. Well, can I just say, I think what you might have in mind is
the net present value,
and that is the amount of value that is created, and
we forecast it out to 10 years. So, for example,
in the example I've used several times now, because it's an easy and simple
one, the hairdresser inspections, we've taken the amount of
money that is paid by hairdressers and dispersed by councils to do these
inspections. And we've calculated the net present value of those
costs to hairdressers and councils over the next 10 years.
Now obviously,
because of the time value of money, in the future
those benefits are less than they are today because if I could give you
$400 now or $400 in 2036, you'd probably
take it now. You'd put a discount on the future.
So our NPV gives you the total value over the next
10 years of not having to do those. If you add all of that together,
for the activities that we've done already, it comes out at
somewhere between $240 and $360
million. So it's a substantial sum.
Obviously, there's variables like how many people will actually grow hemp and how
many people will have a medical conference.
Mm.
But-
Understood
... we have lower and upper estimates for the potential that
we've unlocked, through removing stupid rules, basically.
Mm. So supplementary.
You're using cost benefit analysis as one of the major tools,
for NPV and the like. So it's an economic measure.
So my question is that often,
cost benefit analysis can actually extend some qualitative measures
as well to give you that public benefit.
So that's really where my question lays.
Mm. So if you look at, for example, the way that we've looked at the
effects of the regulatory review on the
early childhood education centers, we've actually drilled down in some
detail to reasonable estimates about,
for example,
not having a double-up of inspections between ERO and the
MOE, how much less time will people spend preparing for
inspections? And then we've taken right down to the minute,
minutes per year, the amount people are paid, and then we've put a value on their
time, and we've said, "Well, we think this is how much time that will be freed up,
through these changes." And then that's given us a dollar value,
and then we extend that over 10 years.
We discount it for the future value being lower, and then we get a
figure that we think that we're probably going to save
$30 million at a minimum, for the early childhood education
center just by removing duplicative
inspections and rule compliances.
Yeah. So you're quantifying all measures.
Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay.
Okay, we've got a supplementary from Georgina, and we're going to go back over to
Todd Stevenson.
Thanks. Just on those 12 regulatory issues,
could you speak to how you will be reporting back to the public
and Parliament on progress on those?
When you say the 12 regulatory issues, do you mean the sector reviews, or?
Yeah, the
12 regulatory issues that are estimated to deliver a net public benefit.
Oh, sure.
The ones you've just referred to.
Yeah. Okay. Sorry.
Yeah.
Yeah. So first of all, they're always up for
challenge. So at the moment, I've given some of the ones that we
did earlier that are easier to demonstrate.
There are others that in the future we'll go back and check, were
our assumptions correct? Um- Did the actual
savings come out within the upper and lower bounds?
But obviously at the moment, the ones that we can check look pretty good.
Others will remain to be seen over time.
For example, how many medical conferences will there be?
How much hemp will people grow?
How much faster will we get agricultural and horticultural products
into the country with our new streamlined
assessment that we have putting in place thanks to the Ag
fort review? All of those things will develop and
continue to be evaluated over time.
Yeah, sorry, my question was specifically about reporting back to the public and
Parliament. Could you address that, please?
Sure. So we're here right now. We've produced the analysis.
We're happy to discuss it, and we'll continue to do that
every year, I expect.
Thanks.
Thank you. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thanks. Minister, you actually did touch on this, this regulatory landscape
report, and I think it turned up like 260-something regulators.
267.
Wow.
Although we're getting to get rid of the Broadcasting Standards Authority, so it's
266. Yeah.
Down one already. But just keen to understand, yeah, a little bit more about that
report, what it uncovered, but then more importantly, how do you see the ministry
using that going forward and how's that going to inform its work program?
Yeah. So, first of all, I think the report has
been released, but it's actually a work in progress, and really
it's not so much the report. The report is a snapshot of this
developing tool where we have a really good
real-time view of how many regulators there are, what they're
doing, what fees they're charging, what laws they're enforcing.
And then you think in the future-
Right
... if we were to, for example,
do a sector review into the financial services sector,
then we would have immediately-
Awesome
... a really good idea of how these folks are
regulated, what fees they're paying, where the overlaps are,
and then when we go out and ask people about regulatory burden they face,
we're forewarned and forearmed with this really rich
database of what regulatory issues that they might already be facing.
And also, how we could simplify the regulatory
landscape that they face, by removing duplication
or perhaps by removing rules that no longer make sense, and
therefore removing the responsibilities of the regulators that are enforcing those
rules.
Just a quick sup- and so did it uncover some areas where there were
multiple, departments or bodies regulating one area?
And anything kind of spring to mind that you're like, "That's just crazy."
Well, I think finance would be a really obvious example of that.
The Council of Financial Regulators was put together as a way of
corralling the FMA, the Reserve Bank, the Com Com,
the Ombudsman. They have so many regulators already,
and it just seems to me that a more streamlined
regulatory approach to the financial services sector could actually get
people better value,
better financial services, more competitors entering the market.
So there's a lot of possibility there.
And while we won't do that in this term of Parliament, perhaps in a future
term of Parliament, the Ministry for Regulation will take that on.
It's probably useful to this committee because that was the kind of area we
identified in our banking-
Mm.
Mm
... report as well, so yeah.
Yeah, and look, it could be that a committee like this might ask the Ministry for
Regulation for support on something like that.
They now have a really valuable tool.
Thank you.
And we've got a new primary from Lawrence Yuen, then.
Thank you, Chair. And I think maybe a few people have supplementary on this.
I just want to move on to the Regulatory Standards Act and the establishment of the
Regulatory Standards Board.
Mm.
My first question, so how much resource will be dedicated over the next
financial year to the implementation of the
deeply unpopular Regulatory Standards Act and the establishment
of the Regulatory Standards Board?
So first of all, I reject the framing of your question.
But second of all,
it's in the material that we've provided the committee.
We expect that the board
will have costs associated with it, circa $1 million.
How much would each of the member for the Regulatory Standards Board be paid, and
would that be the same sort of extravagance that we see with the
average cost of the salary-
No, there's-
... for the Ministry for Regulations?
No. No, there's no extravagance anywhere.
Okay. How much has been spent to date, and how much has been budgeted for
the public sector to implement the competency assessments statements,
and what analysis has been done?
Well, they come into effect on the 1st of July, so none.
None?
How many exclusions have been to date from the Regulatory Standards Act?
Well, that's publicly available. I think we've published it in the House.
And
is the implementation for the Regulatory Standards Act and the
establishment of the RSB to blame for the cost
blowout of the ministry in the coming financial year compared to
other public service sectors?
No, there's no blowout.
There's no blowout? Sure.
Thank you. We'll go to Megan Woods.
Thank you. Thank you.
You may recall last year, we had a conversation about how much
funding had been put towards the tip line.
It wasn't
separated out in terms of the way in which the ministry
accounted for its costs. Have you done that this year?
And if so, how much has the tip line cost?
Yeah, we have a 10-year estimate, which is 4.2 million.
So you might take from that about $400,000 a year.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
How many tips have been received?
1,600.
How many have been duplicate or out of scope?
I'll have to defer to my colleagues on that, but needless
to say, the ones that have been put forward-
Sure
... have been very valuable.
No. Yeah. But have you got a figure on duplicate or out of scope?
I don't know unless one of my colleagues in the back row has that to hand.
Don't have a number on duplicates, no.
Would you be able to get the committee that if we-
Sure.
Sure?
Yeah.
No, that would be good.
I think in fairness there's a value judgment there, right, about
the validity of them because there'll probably be few that are identical.
Sure. So that would just be useful to break that down.
How many of the 1,600 tips have led to changes in
primary legislation?
I'm not sure that any have led to changes in primary legislation.
It hasn't been in place long enough for that to happen.
How many have led to changes in regulation?
I have to defer to Andrew on that, but I know that there's been several.
Just like to see. I might get Paul to come and sit here.
Okay, thank you.
Is that fine?
Yeah.
Cool. I'm Paul Doherty, DC. So I'm responsible for the tip line.
Just on your first question around how many duplicates have there been.
So about 40% of the submissions are actually
across the same area. So it's Building Act, Resource Management Act, AML,
small food businesses. There's a lot of the submissions come in are on
a similar area. So we know that, it's about 40%.
And a lot of the submissions come in, as you pointed out earlier, aren't actually
regulatory issues, like the one that came in around the smart glasses.
But we had to do a lot of investigation around that to determine is it a regulatory
issue or not. It doesn't take that long.
And so let me get back to public around that.
Sure. So just in terms of how many have led to changes in regulation-
Sure
... from the tip line?
So to date, so we've made about 33 recommendations
with regards to changes. I think about-
How many have come-
About 17 changes.
17 have come via the tip, result of-
Yep
... the tip line. Thank you.
In terms of what methodology are you using
to quantify the benefits of the tip line?
Sure. So we do a CBA on each of our
piece of investigation and those CBAs are some of the numbers that you've referred
to earlier in that list of 12. Some of those are tip line
things that have gone through. And we work out some of them have
small returns, some of have significant return.
Like the-
So what's the CBA on the tip line?
What's the CBA on the tip line alone?
Yeah.
So we have the CBA for the organization. We don't differentiate between.
Because how we work is the tip line, we call them low complexity reviews.
And then the bigger reviews we do, we call them high complexity reviews.
And then things like, oh, HEMP is a medium complexity review.
So we have a CBA around reviews. Essentially we don't differentiate between them.
Great. And what's-
Can I just make one other point about that?
Yeah.
That
it would be tempting to view the tip line in isolation and say,
well, what has directly come from the tip line that's led to a
regulatory change? I think in the case, I think HEMP was originally
from the tip line.
Correct.
So the benefit from that I think is estimated at seven million at the
low end. So, that alone you could argue has paid for the tip
line twice over for the next 10 years.
However,
it's not only that benefit that it is deriving.
I've found that the tip line has been really useful because it
actually orients the ministry internally around what the
concerns of people are out there. So for example, we may
be about to begin a regulatory sector review into the Building
Act, and I'm not sure that we'd be doing that were it not for the fact that, as
Paul has said,
the Building Act is one of the most regular callers on the tip
line. People are furious with it, and being able to prioritize that
way I think is quite useful.
So in terms of going back to the question then, the methodology to
quantify this-
Mm
... and the transparency around communicating
that value, what does that look like-
So-
... within the agency?
So it probably goes back to the questions I answered earlier for
I think Dr. Wilson, about taking what are the
values of reduced compliance cost?
What is the value of additional activity?
For example, having medical conferences we wouldn't otherwise have.
And-
Sure. Just wanting to know the methodology and the-
Yeah
... format this will take in terms of the transparency around that.
Right. So-
For example, will there be a dashboard?
Will there be a dashboard? I'm sure
we could do a dashboard, but as far as where the data for that dashboard would
come from,
our chief economist analyzes all of these costs and
benefits, weighs them together to give a net
benefit of a deregulatory action.
And that is
put together the way I've been describing.
Reduced compliance cost, additional economic activity, things that basically
make the economic boat go faster.
We look forward to the reporting. Just finally,
what safeguards have you got
to prevent the tip line becoming basically the
tool of lobbyists, people that have other ways of speaking to government?
I'm assuming that the purpose of the tip line was actually to give a channel for
people who can't otherwise communicate their frustrations with
various regulations that access through.
What safeguards have you put
in place to stop it being clogged up with lobbyists using it
as their channel to government?
Well, I think the thing about lobbyists is that their
whole business model, what they're selling to their clients, is they already have
access to the government. What the tip line has done is ensured
that people who can't afford lobbyists, that aren't politically connected,
but are very frustrated with regulations, have a channel
for them. Now, if lobbyists also want to queue up and
get into the tip line, I guess they can do that, but I would've thought the whole
point is lobbyists don't need this.
It's ordinary people that benefit from the tip line.
And you're confident the lobbyists aren't using it?
If there are any lobbyists in the tip line, we'll smoke them out, don't you worry.
Thank you.
Thanks. We go to a new primary from Dan Bidois.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks, Minister, and to your team for appearing today.
Just going back to the sector reviews, you mentioned that financial sector is
probably a good
area of opportunity. That's clearly a massive work stream,
probably involving the Ministry of Finance and the Governor I'm
just wondering what your perspective is
on lower hanging fruit in terms of sector opportunities.
Where do you see maybe
first opportunities to lower
regulation in different sectors?
Well, where to start? If you look at the sector reviews that we've done already,
early childhood,
agricultural and horticultural products, hair dressing,
telecommunications, hospitality.
I struggle to name them all at once. Which ones am I missing, Ruth ?
So the one we're looking at the moment is offensive traits.
Is that a really interesting one?
Yep, and that one too.
Yep.
That's going to be a doozy. We've also, as you know, started a review of solar
panels.
Our goal is to make it as easy to install a solar panel
in New Zealand as it is in South Australia, which seems to be the fastest place in
the world to get a solar panel installed. So there's no shortage of those.
But there's no reason why the ministry, as it grows its capability,
shouldn't be taking on sectors like financial services, because that's where huge
cost has been put on New Zealanders.
Good stuff. And then, I guess a lot of us
went to field days recently, and it still comes up a lot,
the regulatory burden that
food fiber ag sectors face.
What's your ministry working on to help lower
that regulatory burden?
Well, I think the most important initiative there is the agricultural and
horticultural products.
Mm-hmm.
If you think about veterinary medicines, you think about sprays,
inhibitors, pesticides,
anything that you can buy at RD1, basically.
Mm-hmm.
We have been woeful as a country in consenting these new
products. You would think that New Zealand, given our agricultural
prowess and being an agricultural and horticultural powerhouse, would be
leading the world at this stuff. But actually, it's so bad
that often products that are manufactured overseas will come
to the end of line, and New Zealanders are left with no product because the
new replacement product that their competitors overseas are using has not been
consented in New Zealand yet. That's why we estimate that the
benefit of halving the consent time is about $270
million. That's not necessarily what will happen straight away, but it gives you
an idea of the size of the prize.
And we currently have legislation before the House
that will implement the recommendations from the
agricultural and horticultural sector review.
We've already had significant reductions in wait times.
We've put in place new governance for the
consent so that the sector actually can give feedback when things are taking too
long.
And we've also, as a result of that sector review, seen
investment in the toxicology models at the EPA.
So quite a lot is happening to get products to market
quicker so that New Zealand farmers can be competitive.
Good stuff. And then finally, Mr. Chair, do you want to give us an update on the
Regulatory Standards Board? I know next month, I think it's standing up,
but you've made some-
Yeah
... appointments and what's the update on that going?
Yeah, look, really thrilled with the board.
It is a board that has people from diverse backgrounds,
diverse thinking. We've got one of the University of Auckland's best
economists, Professor Ananish Chaudhuri.
We've also got an unapologetic tradie,
who came to the first meeting in shorts, so what a legend.
So, we've got some great people on that board, and I think
what they're going to do is give New Zealanders reassurance
that when a minister publishes a consistency accountability
statement to say, "Well, look, this is what my law will actually do to you and
your rights," people will say, "Yeah, actually, I believe that because the
Regulatory Standards Board has taken a look at it and signed it off."
And I think ministers will be saying, "Geez,
I could have probably got away with a RIS that wasn't quite complete."
Mm-hmm.
"But I don't really want an adverse report from the
Regulatory Standards Board showing up at a select committee like this, and then
having to explain why I didn't fully declare the
violations of people's liberties and property rights or the lack of cost-benefit
analysis in my law."
So I think it's going to substantially change the landscape for lawmaking
in favor of people that just want to get on and realize their potential, use and
exchange their property to make a better world.
Thank you. Dr. Megan Woods.
Thank you. So some people would argue that
the Regulatory Standards Bill has added
red tape to agencies. Have you asked your
agency to look at the potential cost
on other agency of the Regulatory Standards Bill
requirements?
First of all, I want to know who those people are.
Look, there's no question that the Regulatory Standards
Bill makes it harder to pass laws
that restrict people's freedoms and property rights. That's the whole point.
So yes, it will add compliance costs to departments
because they will have to justify their decisions, but those costs are
nothing compared to the costs that New Zealanders have faced for far
too long, when ministers and
parliaments introduce and pass laws with a cavalier attitude and
no concern for the costs they're putting on everyone else.
So have you asked the agency to
quantify that cost for you?
I believe it was quantified during the passage of the bill.
I don't have those figures off the top of my head.
Do any of your officials have-
Possibly my officials will. Andrew, would you like to return to the stage?
Yeah. Thank you.
When we did the RIS,
which I think was then reported through to this committee when the bill was
considered, we put a figure of $18 million
... dollars on that from memory.
And the other thing I'd just add to that is to say that we will be doing
a series of work
as part of our work program out over the next few years to look at implementation
of the bill.
Sure. So that was going to be my next supplementary question, that whether you'll
be tracking that increased compliance and the actual cost
falling on agencies and which agencies, and quantifying that over
time. Will that be work the agency is doing?
Well, we are currently scoping what the-
Yeah
... exactly what the work looks like.
So-
Mm
... and the only reason I caveat that slightly is to say that
we might make some estimates around some of these issues rather than getting
actual reporting back from agencies about costs.
But we will-
And-
... be looking at implementation
... and what will be the channel for this committee, for example,
having a line of sight into that work?
I've got a-
Well, I guess-
I mean, I've got to stop.
Thanks, Minister. But just hearing what are thought.
Yeah. I mean, if the
committee would like to request that kind of information, then we can
seek to estimate it as best we can now, and I'm sure that in future years
committees will remain interested in the costs of policy
advice right across the government.
I seem to recall, and I stand to be corrected, but the cost of
policy advice to government is around $870
million per annum. If we spend
$18 million of that $870
million on ensuring that New Zealanders'
rights are better reflected in the lawmaking process,
then I don't think that's a bad deal.
Sure. Sorry, the last one, Mr. Chair.
In terms of the original estimate that came through in the res of
18 million, has there been any updated
estimates since the regulatory impact statement on the cost?
Not yet.
Okay. Thank you.
A supplementary from Lawrence Yuen.
Yeah.
Thank you. Just on the Regulatory Standards Board,
the minister will be aware that New Zealand has one of the worst,
I guess, ratings, one of the poorest ratings in the OECD for
regulations and review. Can I just check in terms of the
work that will be undertaken by the Regulatory Standards Board, how does the
minister think that will orient towards better regulation?
And particularly one of the worst indicators across
various aspects, such as regulatory impact assessment, cycle
engagement and review is around methodology.
What are your thoughts? What are the minister's thoughts on that?
Well, you're making the case for the Regulatory Standards Act and the
Regulatory Standards Board. I think we have done a poor job,
as successive governments and parliaments, of disclosing the costs of new
rules to the public that are paying those costs.
This will, through the entire process, and we can rehearse it if the chair would
like to give us the time, but,
through the process that is set out in the Regulatory Standards Act, we will
get much better transparency around the cost of new laws.
I guess my question's around in terms of orientating towards
better regulations, particularly when it come to methodological approaches,
how would the new system ensure
that the approach is done in a way that doesn't
lead to public dissatisfaction and erodes trust in government, as well
as being evidence-based rather than decision-based?
Well, obviously, we will do everything we can to avoid public
dissatisfaction.
Thank you. Supplementary from Dr. Deborah Russell.
I have a-
Noting that we are just about at time, so.
Sure.
Oh.
This is just a follow-up to something you said, Minister.
You said that
New Zealanders should be concerned, or at least will get some information on
the, cavalier, I think was the word you used, legislation that's gone
through.
Mm.
In that case, can I just get a view from you on the extent to which
that is consistent with this government having used extraordinary amounts of
urgency, introducing significant amendments at committee stage
and really, I think, taking the mickey out of parliamentary establishment
laws-
It's a little bit beyond the scope, you'd like.
No, it's relevant, exactly relevant to something-
Very much so
... the minister said. It's very consistent.
Mm.
Because that is surely something you personally would be worried about given your
concern about the cavalier implementation of legislation.
Oh, absolutely, and I often think about it, and I just think,
had the previous government not left the books in such a mess, we wouldn't-
Oh
... have had to be in such a hurry.
That's just.
Are there any more supplementaries?
No.
I'll ask this question.
Fantastic.
Already?
Just a question from me-
Oh
... Minister, in closing. There was, I saw a recent review on dog control.
Yep.
And the
inconsistency across councils and local government, central government.
What has that example given you in terms of going forward, how you
might implement strategic direction in this ministry?
Well, I think, one of the things that we've done with this
regulatory mapping exercise is we've discovered, and
the figures aren't fresh in my mind, but there's something like 11 different laws
that govern dogs. There's at least five different departments.
There's another handful of non-government
regulators, such as the SPCA.
The Minister of Local Government has been charged with
reforming the dog control laws.
If nothing else, having that regulatory map, understanding which laws,
who enforces them, who's liable to them, what are the fees, that puts you in
a much more powerful position to be able to start saying, "Okay,
this has kind of all just evolved over time. Nobody planned it this way.
But if I was to plan a really tight, efficient regulatory
system for dog control,
which of these would I still require, and which of these laws would
stay, and what would it look like to design something better?" So,
if nothing else, the regulatory mapping system has equipped
a minister, such as Simon Watts in this case, to
have an easier time doing a better job of reforming dog control laws.
Would you call that Clause Canine?
All right, I couldn't resist. Minister, thank you for your time and-
Get serious
about it. We've got a few more.
It was so funny.
You're a real moaner.
Claws to you. Oh, very good.
Thank you, Minister.
Thank you.
That's terrible.
Sorry.
All good.
Thank you. Down I'll-